---
layout: post
title: Tales from the Bonner Ausländeramt date: 2021-07-26 13:46:00 +0100
author: Charles Tapley Hoyt
tags: expat
---
This is a more personal blog post about my experience as an american expat in Germany - specifically about my
experiences at the Bonner Ausländeramt (Bonn's Foreigner's Office of the City of Bonn).

I moved to Germany in August 2015 and immediately began my first incarnation of the Ausländer Shuffle (which I
affectionately name after
the [NU Shuffle](https://huntnewsnu.com/49669/editorial/editorial-students-want-an-end-to-the-nu-shuffle/)
). Luckily, as a USA citizen, I entered the country with a 90-day tourist visa which required no prior paperwork or
pre-registration; just show up. In that 90 days, I had to get all of my paperwork in order, which included a local cell
phone number, proof of local housing, proof of German insurance, proof of minimum bank account funds, and ultimately
proof of enrollment at the university. This was about as non-linear as a Kurt Vonnegut novel. I had the benefit that my
housing had been pre-registered by my study program. For everyone else, the first thing they'd have to do is find
housing, and even worse, do it without the benefit of all the other paperwork that they couldn't get without already
having housing.

After that was all done, I was able to sign up for my first appointment with the Bonner Ausländeramt (Terminvereinbarung
im Ausländeramt). Side bar: an adjectival is when you turn a noun into an adjective. In the German language, most places
can be converted into an adjectival by adding the -er suffix. That's why it's called Wiener Schnitzel - it's Schnitzel
from Wien (Vienna). Sign-ups for appointments are online (https://www.bonn.de/antrag_auslaenderamt), then they send you
information about your appointment by snail mail. Unfortunately, this office has not yet digitalized. You're assigned a
case worker based on your last name, and you typically stay with them the entire time you live in the city. They will
keep a paper file in their office on you, next to all the other paper files for all the other foreigners in Bonn. People
from the USA are typically given a two year visa when studying. In theory, this is more than enough time for most study
programs. Studying in Germany is cheap (just a 200-300 Euro administration per semester) so a lot of people decide to
take their time. I didn't (oops).

My second encounter with the Ausländeramt was two years later after I had finished my master's degree in November 2017,
before starting my Ph.D.. The Ausländeramt snail mailed me unprompted a few months ahead of time with a date and
checklist of all the things I would need to renew my visa. They either have a very boilerplate document for renewals (
most likely) or just assumed that my studies hadn't yet concluded, and therefore most of the document wasn't applicable.
I had my Ph.D. work contract with Fraunhofer, but not yet proof of my Ph.D. student status (I learned later that this is
its own nightmare) but they effectively let it slide and issued a new student/work visa. Side bar again: it's really
great for companies to have students working for them. You have so few rights when you're also a student, and companies
don't have to follow many of the worker laws. This is partially why Fraunhofer's business model to recruit as many
students as possible to do most of the work is so great for Fraunhofer.

My third encounter with the Ausländeramt was two years later after I had finished my Ph.D. in December 2019, but they
did not issue me an appointment unprompted (I'm not sure why). I ended up finding the sign up form again, that I had
forgotten about from four years prior and signing up for an appointment a few months in advance. After finishing
graduate studies in Germany, you can get an 18-month "work search visa" which is mostly the same as a work visa but is
issued even if you don't already have a job. I was exited by this because I wanted to take some time off. The only issue
was they issued my appointment after when my visa expired. This was particularly bad becuase it was in December, and I
wanted to travel for the holidays. If I did this and my visa expired while I was out of the country, I would have a big
problem - you can't re-enter for 6 months after your visa expires. I tried emailing (unsuccessfully) and phoning the
office every day for two hole weeks. They don't answer the phone. It turns out that sometimes it forwards to the City
Hall, and they are very annoyed to get questions about Ausländer affairs. With the end of December approaching and still
no plan how to get home for Christmas, I ended up going to the office at 6:45AM (it opens at 8AM) one day try and get a
walk-in appointment. I was the 5th person in line, and by the time office opened at 8AM, the line was going down the
street. I knew I would be quick, but there were many people who were unprepared, had extenuating circumstances, or were
just a more difficult case to deal with, so only a few of them would be seen between 8AM and noon when the office
closed. Being 5th, I got to see the walk-in administrator around 9:30AM, and they easily issued me a
Fiktionsbescheinigung after only a few minutes of describing my situation. That document states that my case has
basically been approved, but the paperwork is still pending. Effectively, I could travel with my expired visa + this
document freely, and I then proceeded to book a very expensive last minute flight back home. Unfortunately, my
appointment was just after New Year's, so I didn't get much vacation at hom.

All the people I've talked to at the Ausländeramt were good people. They're just really understaffed, overworked, and
without the benefit of competent programmers and a progressive digitalization agenda to make their lives and the lives
of their clients better. Then the Coronavirus hit. Everything was shut down for months. They issued emergency visa
extensions since they couldn't work in office, and none of the work could be done from home. The facade collapsed and it
left many people confused, unsure, and anxious about their statuses.

My fourth encounter with the Ausländeramt should have been sometime around today, since my visa is no longer valid
tomorrow. Unfortunately, I signed up two months ago for an appointment and never received any post. I emailed the office
to ask for a confirmation, and got nothing back. The office doesn't answer their phone line (this is the same now as it
was before the pandemic). The difference between this time and last time is when I went to get a walk-in appointment, I
was refused at the door by security because of pandemic precautions such that only appointment holders can enter. It
turns out they're still rotating which staff are in on any given day and many have home office (where they can't really
work, since all of it is done on paper that lives in the office itself). I have been very anxious about this day coming
and officially tomorrow I will be in Germany illegally.
