I joined the [INDRA team](https://indralab.github.io) in
the [Laboratory of Systems Pharmacology](https://labsyspharm.org)
and [Harvard Program of Therapeutic Sciences](https://hits.harvard.edu) in
Harvard Medical School about a year ago, and I

I've been at Harvard Medical School for about a year and I wanted to reflect on
that time

# How I got here

I met John Bachman through Dexter Pratt in 2017 at ISMB in Prague when I was
beginning to re-write the computational ecosystem for the Biological Expression
Language.

# Being proud of my colleagues

I've seen a few of my team members move on to new jobs. It's true that working
in an academic position for a software developer or scientific programmer is not
going to pay as much as a similar position in pharma or tech, but it has the
benefit that we get to work in a more transparent way on potentially more
interesting stuff. There's no right or wrong choice here and there are all sorts
of other reasons you might want to pick one job over another.

A few team members have left to move on to new jobs and it occurred to me that I
had never been in a working environment where I was comfortable with being
excited about that. I am super happy for my previous collegaues John, Albert,
Diana, and Sam who have all found interesting new positions across pharma,
biotech, and tech.

# Working under Ben

I think I'm really lucky to have joined the INDRA team when I did - from what
I've heard, Ben has worked very hard to improve as a leader. I think in a
scientific position it's truly necessary for someone to be really good at what
they do to command respect, which he definitely has. But that's only a
pre-requisite for me, and not the whole thing. Ben has incredible organization,

Ben is gracious in the way that he gives praise and also criticism

He's incredibly well-spoken - I think it comes very naturally to him to speak in
a diplomatic way

While we share many values, we also have a few conflicts - Ben is a very
pragmatic person

# Amazing Co-workers

It's true that there are mediocre people everywhere, even at Harvard, but it's
really great to work with such motivated people.

# Working remote is tough