---
layout: post
title: The Representatives of Monkey Jack - German Battle of the Bands Finale
date: 2023-03-29 20:33:23 +0100
author: Charles Tapley Hoyt
tags: music
---

This blog is normally about <strong>very serious science</strong>, but I'm
taking a break from that for the evening to advertize my band's upcoming show on
April 8<sup>th</sup> in the SPH Music Masters Finale (aka, the German Battle of
the Bands). We need your support! There are streaming tickets available, and
this post has a guide on how to navigate the German website to get tickets (or
just text me, I'll hook you up).

Here's a video of us playing. If you love it, let me know. If you hate it, slap
like and subscribe.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/P1OXgfN8xIU" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## When is this?

The show is on April 8<sup>th</sup> at the Live Music Hall in Cologne, Germany.
Because this is Easter weekend, it's the perfect thing to do while you're
relaxing with your family. The show starts at 15.30 CEST / 9:30AM EST. The order
of the 10 bands playing will be determined on the morning of, so I'll send out a
mass text about what time that will be for everyone who's streaming.

## How does the battle work?

The battle of the bands is judged in two ways: half of the score is by the
judges and half by the audience. Each audience member gets two votes - this
usually means they vote for the band they support and a second band that they
liked after seeing them for the first time.

There will be 10 bands playing, which means this is going to be a loooooong day.
The best spots in the show will be in the middle or towards the end, after the
afternoon settles into evening. The order will be determined just before the
show starts, based on which band sells the most pre-sale tickets. This means
that getting a streaming ticket will support us to get a better spot, which is
highly correlated with winning.

## Who is Monkey Jack, and why do you represent him?

As you noticed, we're the <i>representatives</i> of Monkey Jack. We will tell
The Tale of Monkey Jack at our show. You should prepare by bringing a banana
with you to the show, which you will need at the end of the Tale when we begin
<i>The Ritual</i>.

## Getting a Ticket

First, navigate [here](https://www.sph-music-masters.de/tickets/index/3765) for
tickets.

Second, click <i>Streamingtickets</i>. If you want to be cool while speaking
German, you should throw in some English words (or internationalisms).

![](/img/monkey-jack-lmh/step1.png)

Third, click <i>Auswählen</i>. This verb means that you are pledging your
allegiance to Monkey Jack and promise to follow <strong><i>Him</i></strong>.

![](/img/monkey-jack-lmh/step2.png)

Fourth, click <i>Bitte Wählen</i> (please choose). This is a drop down menu to
show your support for Monkey Jack and his representatives. Note that you only
need one streaming ticket per stream, obviously you should throw a party/ritual
to represent Monkey Jack yourself.

![](/img/monkey-jack-lmh/step3.png)

Fifth, click <i>Monkey Jack</i>.

![](/img/monkey-jack-lmh/step4.png)

Sixth, You can fill in the form with your information. The image below annotates
what each of the fields means. Plz is short for "Postleitzahl", which means Zip
code. Don't worry about the part of the form with the country picker. You're a
German now.

![](/img/monkey-jack-lmh/step5.png)

After you click it, it will bring you to a PayPal page. They'll email you a
confirmation within 5-10 minutes and send the streaming link the day of the
show.
