---
layout: post
title: Books I Read in 2024
date: 2025-01-18 9:33:00 +0100
author: Charles Tapley Hoyt
tags:
  - books
---

Here's the books I read in 2024. If I were Dudley Dursley, I'd be very upset
that I read one fewer new book than [in
2023]({% post_url 2024-01-01-books-in-2023 %}). But then, I'd remember that I
re-read a lot of Cosmere in 2024 to prepare for \_Wind and Truth), which was
great.

1. Iron Gold (Red Rising #4) by Pierce Brown
2. Dark Age (Red Rising #5) by Pierce Brown
3. Light Bringer (Red Rising #5) by Pierce Brown
4. The Fifth Season (Broken Earth #1) by N.K. Jemisin
5. Emma by Jane Austen
6. The Obelisk Gate (Broken Earth #2) by N.K. Jemisin
7. The Slow Regard of Silent Things (Kingkiller Chronicles) by Patrick Rothfuss
8. The Narrow Road Between Desires (Kingkiller Chronicles) by Patrick Rothfuss
9. The Three Body Problem (Remembrance of Earth's Past #1) by Cixin Liu
10. The Dark Forest (Remembrance of Earth's Past #2) by Cixin Liu
11. Death's End (Remembrance of Earth's Past #3) by Cixin Liu
12. Artificial Condition (Murderbot Diaries #2) by Martha Wells
13. Rogue Protocol (Murderbot Diaries #3) by Martha Wells
14. Exit Strategy (Murderbot Diaries #4) by Martha Wells
15. A Deadly Education (Scholomance #1) by Naomi Novik
16. Network Effect (Murderbot Diaries #5) by Martha Wells
17. Fugitive Telemetry (Murderbot Diaries #6) by Martha Wells
18. System Collapse (Murderbot Diaries #7) by Martha Wells
19. The Last Graduate (Scholomance #2) by Naomi Novik
20. The Golden Enclaves (Scholomance #2) by Naomi Novik
21. The Machine Stops by E.M. Forster
22. Grief is the Thing with Feathers by Max Porter
23. A Natural History of Dragons (Lady Trent #1) by Marie Brennan
24. The Tropic of Serpents (Lady Trent #2) by Marie Brennan
25. A Journey to the Center of the Earth by Jules Verne
26. Simple Passion by Annie Ernaux
27. Exhalation by Ted Chiang
28. Before the Coffee Gets Cold by Toshikazu Kawaguchi
29. The Sirens of Titan by Kurt Vonnegut Jr.
30. What You Can See from Here by Mariana Leky
31. The Rithmatist by Brandon Sanderson
32. The Voyage of the Basilisk (Lady Trent #3) by Marie Brennan
33. A Court of Thorns and Roses (ACOTAR #1) by Sarah J. Maas
34. The Stone Sky (Broken Earth #3) by N.K. Jemisin
35. The Alchemist by Paulo Coelho
36. In the Labyrinth of Drakes (Lady Trent #4) by Marie Brennan
37. Within the Sanctuary of Wings (Lady Trent #5) by Marie Brennan
38. Indigo Ridge by Perry Devney
39. City of Stairs (Divine Cities #1) by Robert Jackson Bennett
40. Bartleby the Scrivner by Herman Melville
41. Beowulf
42. Wind and Truth (Stormlight Archives #5) by Brandon Sanderson

### Rereads

- Cosmere: Stormlight Archive 1-4 and Warbreaker
- Kingkiller Chronicles: Name of the Wind and A Wise Man's Fear

### What I Loved (minor spoilers):

1. Every single short story in Exhalation. You can check out my favorite,
   [The Merchant and the Alchemist's Gate](https://images.shulcloud.com/1202/uploads/Documents/TheMerchantandtheAlchemistsGate.pdf),
   which is about how to find meaning in time travel, even if you can't change
   anything.
2. The Alchemist. It beats you over the head with its moral philosophy about
   seizing your destiny. It's great.
3. The sci-fi in the whole Three Body Problem trilogy. Lots of great ideas, even
   if the characters were weak at moments. I initially didn't like Luo Ji, but
   he eventually had a great arc which I've come to understand follows a more
   typical Chinese archetype.
4. Lady Trent has such a great tone and voice as a narrator. The epistolary
   format worked so well for these books.
5. Fifth ideals!

### Non-superlative Comments

1. Last year, I wrote that I wasn't a big fan of Murderbot #1. I stand by my
   criticism of the first book, but I'm glad I tried the rest, because it
   addressed my qualms and was a lot of fun.
2. ACOTAR would have definitely benefited from having a major revision to
   tighten up the story and characters, but I am sad when people trash on it. I
   enjoyed it.

### Disappointments

1. I started Persuasion by Jane Austen, but I didn't care for any of the
   characters, so I haven't finished it yet.
2. I heard so many times that The Fifth Season and its sequels were great. The
   first book had a cool premise and cool reveal at the end, but the second and
   third book just didn't have any good characters or plot to hold it together.
   I should have put it down after the second book, but I just assumed that
   since each installment won a Hugo award, that there was a massive payoff at
   the end. There was not.
3. There weren't enough Brandon Sandwiches, so I read his non-Cosmere novel, The
   Rithmatist, that will never get a sequel. When will I learn?
4. I'm very disappointed by the Netflix adaptation of Three Body Problem for not
   doing a better job of rewriting the characters. How can anyone in Hollywood
   trust Benioff and Weiss after Game of Thrones?

### Funny Story

When I was in Gaspé over the summer, we were hanging out at a cafe that
suggested Simple Passion by Annie Ernaux as the book of the week. My sister and
I figured, we could read it and make some friends that week if they also had. We
didn't find anyone else who even noticed the sign about it being book of the
week.
