---
layout: post
title: Books I Read in 2025
date: 2026-01-01 22:22:00 +0100
author: Charles Tapley Hoyt
tags:
  - books
---

Here are the books I read in 2025. My goals for the year were to get some more
variety, and I think I managed that.

1. Turning Darkness Into Light (The Memoirs of Lady Trent, #6) by Marie Brennan
2. Jade City (The Green Bone Saga #1) by Fonda Lee
3. Jade War (The Green Bone Saga #2) by Fonda Lee
4. Jade Legacy (The Green Bone Saga #3) by Fonda Lee
5. A Court of Mist and Fury (ACOTAR, #2) by Sarah J. Maas
6. Everyone You Hate is Going to Die by Daniel Sloss
7. Intimacies by Katie Kitamura
8. A Court of Wings and Ruin (ACOTAR, #3) by Sarah J. Maas
9. The Raven Tower by Ann Leckie
10. The Night Circus by Erin Morgenstern
11. The Fall by Albert Camus
12. The Lies of Locke Lamora (Gentleman Bastard, #1) by Scott Lynch
13. The Will of the Many (Hierarchy, #1) by James Islington
14. The Empress of Salt and Fortune by Nghi Vo
15. Red Seas Under Red Skies (Gentleman Bastard, #2) by Scott Lynch
16. Reckless by Cornelia Funke
17. The Republic of Thieves (Gentleman Bastard, #3) by Scott Lynch
18. Isles of the Emberdark by Brandon Sanderson
19. The Priory of the Orange Tree by Samantha Shannon
20. The River Has Roots by El-Mohtar Amal
21. Marytr! by Kaveh Akbar
22. A Man Called Ove by Fredrik Backman
23. Open Throat by Henry Hoke
24. The Midnight Library by Matt Haig
25. The Tainted Cup (Shadow of the Leviathan, #1) by Robert Jackson Bennett
26. The Catcher in the Rye by J.D. Salinger
27. The Strength of the Few (Hierarchy, #2) by James Islington
28. A Drop Of Corruption (Shadow of the Leviathan, #2) by Robert Jackson Bennett
29. Piranesi by Susanna Clarke
30. The Sun Also Rises by Ernest Hemingway

All comments below are spoiler-free, except a minor note about the ending of
_Martyr!_.

Highlights:

1. The Night Circus was my favorite. It evoked a really special magical feeling
2. The Green Bone Saga was an excellent trilogy, with perfect pacing,
   progression, and knew the perfect spot to end.
3. Title drops are very important. The ending of Open Throat was very cathartic.
4. There was only one Brandon sandwich this year, but... SHARD GUNS

Comments:

- I was in a reading slump in the summer, so I also re-read Stormlight Archive.
  Now knowing the end of Wind and Truth, it's crazy to see the foreshadowing to
  the end.
- I liked _The Tainted Cup_ and _A Drop of Corruption_ because Din and Ana are
  very interesting characters and the world building is great. But, I'm not sure
  if I'm sold on mystery, at least in books. I enjoy film and television
  adaptations, though.
- A new bookstore opened in Fall in Beuel that is hosting
  [silent reading nights](https://beuelerbuchladen.de/veranstaltungen/) once per
  month. I had a great time going there with friends, and we even instituted our
  own silent reading nights (with snacks).

Disappointments:

1. _The Will of the Many_ perfected the genres and archetypes that it pulls
   from, but _The Strength of the Few_ mostly missed the mark. Because of the
   twist from the end of the first book, it had to do a lot of world-building
   and create new plot and character arcs for the protagonist(s). I think it
   didn't match the tone promise of the first novel and ultimately felt like the
   whole book was three side quests with new side characters in whom I wasn't as
   invested in as in the first book. _The Strength of the Few_ had severe middle
   child syndrome and felt bloated, but I think that it can be salvaged in the
   next (and last?) installment.
2. (minor spoilers) _Martyr!_ told the story of a deeply troubled man who wanted
   to write a book on what makes death meaningful and decide himself if he
   wanted to continue living. While it had a positive ending, I think it
   ultimately failed to deliver any (well-organized) revelations about what
   makes a meaningful life, a meaningful death, or on martyrdom, either in-story
   to the protagonist or on a meta level to me as the reader. I would instead
   look to novels by Kurt Vonnegut for this kind of cleverness.
3. I'm still motivated to read classics, but was pretty disappointed with
   _Catcher in the Rye_ and _The Sun Also Rises_. I didn't feel like they had
   much going in terms of character, plot, or theme that secures their
   longevity. Obviously, it was an achievement to write a character as hatable
   as Holden Caulfield, but neither book had clear tone/plot/theme promises nor
   delivered on them.

Won't Finish:

1. The Name of the Rose by Umberto Eco. The world building, characters, and
   writing annoyed me, and I was completely checked out by the time the plot
   started. We read this as part of book club in preparation for a trip to
   [Kloster Eberbach](https://kloster-eberbach.de), where the adaptation of the
   book was filmed. However, 4/6 of our bookclub DNF'd this one, and we
   instituted a 200-page maximum for future books. At least the Kloster was
   beautiful and had good wine!
2. Neuromancer by William Gibson. This book single-handedly created the
   cyberpunk aesthetic. However, the story was weak and the characters were
   uncomfortably outdated, so I put this one down. I imagine many writers had a
   similar experience and thought they could do better. This is probably why
   there are so many good stories with cyberpunk aesthetic!

Reading goals for 2026: more variety and more reading in German!
